Fred's edit pass on content collections guide (#2371)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/guides/content-collections.mdx

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - **newsletter/** 
    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
    - week-3.md
</FileTree>

Once you have a content collection in place with at least one content entry, you can query your content using Astro's built-in APIs.

### Creating a new content collection

To create a new content collection, add a new top-level directory to the `src/content/` folder of your project. If a `src/content` directory doesn't already exist in your project, create it.

Fill your collection directory with related Markdown and/or MDX files. Content collections work best when all files in the collection follow a similar frontmatter structure. If two files represent two different kinds of content (a blog post and an author profile, for example) they most likely belong in two different collections. 

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - **newsletter/** 
    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
    - week-3.md
  - **authors/** diffrent content types belong in different collections
    - grace-hopper.md
    - alan-turing.md
    - batman.md
</FileTree>

> If your content frontmatter varries too wildly between files in a single collection, features like frontmatter validation and automatic TypeScript typings become less powerful. You can optionally define and enforce a required [frontmatter schema](/en/guides/content-collections/#defining-a-collection-schema) across the entire collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your content frontmatter varries too wildly between files in a single collection, features like frontmatter validation and automatic TypeScript typings become less powerful. You can optionally define and enforce a required [frontmatter schema](#creating-a-collection-schema) across the entire collection.
```

### Organizing your collections with subdirectories

A content collection is *always* a top-level folder inside of the `src/content/` directory. You cannot nest one collection inside of another. However, you can use a nested subdirectory to organize your content within a collection. 

For example, you can use the following subdirectory structure to add international translations within a collection:

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - docs/
    - en/
    - es/
    - ...
</FileTree>

## Configuration

Astro allows you to customize and configure your project's content collections through an optional `src/content/config.ts` file (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). 

> Currently, this file supports [defining a collection schema](#defining-a-collection-schema) and [creating custom unique slugs](#custom-entry-slugs) for your collections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, this file supports [creating a collection schema](#creating-a-collection-schema) and [defining custom unique slugs](#defining-custom-slugs) for your collections.
```

### Creating a collection schema

Schemas are an optional way to enforce consistent frontmatter within a collection. Without a schema, you have no way to guarantee that a frontmatter property actually exists when you go to reference it inside a page or component template.

To create a content collection schema, first create a `src/content/config.ts` file if one does not already exist (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). This file should:

1. Import the proper utilities from `astro:content`. 
2. Define a schema for each collection you'd like to validate.
3. Export a single `collections` object to apply your schemas.

> ```ts

Author: done! tried a new approach to this that also lets us highlight using external schemas. Let me know what you think!

> ```ts

Author: done!

  <Since v="2.0.0" />
</p>

**Content collections** are a feature to help manage your Markdown and MDX files in Astro. A collection will organize your content, validate your frontmatter, and provide automatic TypeScript type-safety of fetched content. 

Content collections are the best way to work with Markdown and MDX in your project. For smaller projects, you can also [save your Markdown directly inside of the `src/pages/` directory.](/en/core-concepts/astro-pages/#markdownmdx-pages)

## What are Content Collections?

A **content collection** is any directory inside the reserved `src/content` project directory, such as `src/content/newsletter` and `src/content/blog`. Only content collections are allowed inside the `src/content` directory. This directory cannot be used for anything else.

> Content collections help you organize the content files in your project. A content collection can contain any number of related Markdown (`.md`) or MDX (`.mdx`) files. These files within a collection are called **content entries.**

Author: reworded! But kept a similar focus on defining the term. This term becomes important later so it feels important to give it that focus here.

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - **newsletter/** 
    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
    - week-3.md
</FileTree>

> Once you have a content collection in place with at least one content entry, you can query your content using Astro's built-in APIs.

Author: you're right. Leaving it in but making it link to the query APIs, in case someone wants to skip over the configuration section and go straight to usage.

    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
    - week-3.md
  - **authors/** diffrent content types belong in different collections
    - grace-hopper.md
    - alan-turing.md
    - batman.md
</FileTree>

If your content frontmatter varies too wildly between files in a single collection, features like frontmatter validation and automatic TypeScript typings become less powerful. You can optionally define and enforce a required [frontmatter schema](#creating-a-collection-schema) across the entire collection.

### Organizing your collections with subdirectories

A content collection is *always* a top-level folder inside of the `src/content/` directory. You cannot nest one collection inside of another. However, you can use a nested subdirectory to organize your content within a collection. 

For example, you can use the following subdirectory structure to add international translations within a collection:

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - docs/
    - en/
    - es/
    - ...
</FileTree>

## Configuration

Astro allows you to customize and configure your project's content collections through an optional `src/content/config.ts` file (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). 

> Currently, this file supports [creating a collection schema](#creating-a-collection-schema) and [defining custom unique slugs](#defining-custom-slugs) for your collections.

Author: I actually think this whole sentence can go! it doesn't add much and is slightly confusing ("wait, why are they calling out that its limited to just two features?")

const blogCollection = defineCollection({ schema: blogSchema });
const newsletterCollection = defineCollection({ schema: newsletterSchema });
// 3. Export multiple collections to register them
export const collections = {
  'blog': blogCollection,
  'newsletter': newsletterCollection,
};
```

### Using third-party collection schemas

You are free to import schemas and collections from anywhere, including external npm packages. This can be useful when working with themes and libraries that provide their own collection schemas for you to use.

```ts
// src/content/config.ts
import {blogSchema} from 'my-blog-theme';
const blogCollection = defineCollection({ schema: blogSchema });
// Export the blog collection, using an external schema from 'my-blog-theme'
export const collections = {
  'blog': blogCollection,
};
```

### Defining datatypes with Zod

Astro leverages [Zod](https://github.com/colinhacks/zod) to create frontmatter schemas in the form of [Zod objects](https://github.com/colinhacks/zod#objects). With Zod, Astro is able to validate every file's frontmatter within a collection *and* provide automatic TypeScript types when you go to query content from inside your project.

> To use Zod in Astro, import the `z` utility from `"astro:content"`. This is a re-export of the Zod library, and you are able to use all Zod features inside of Astro. See [Zod’s README](https://github.com/colinhacks/zod) for complete documentation on how Zod works and what features are available.

Author: the "this is a re-export" point is important so that people know it's not somehow different from Zod. Reworded to help it read better.

  <Since v="2.0.0" />
</p>

**Content collections** are the best way to work with Markdown and MDX in any Astro project. Content collections are a feature of Astro that help manage your content files in a project. Collections help to organize your content, validate your frontmatter, and provide automatic TypeScript type-safety for all of your content.

## What are Content Collections?

A **content collection** is any directory inside the reserved `src/content` project directory, such as `src/content/newsletter` and `src/content/blog`. Only content collections are allowed inside the `src/content` directory. This directory cannot be used for anything else.

> A **content entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection. Content entries are stored as either Markdown (`.md`) or MDX (`.mdx`) files, saved inside of content collection directory. Your content entries can be named anything you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme to make it easier to find and organize your content. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **content entry** is any piece of content stored inside of your content collection. Content entries are stored as either Markdown (`.md`) or MDX (`.mdx`) files, saved inside of the content collection directory. Your content entries can be named anything you want, but we recommend using a consistent naming scheme to make it easier to find and organize your content. 
```
At a minimum, there's a missing word, so that's what I've corrected.

Additionally: I feel like this got wordier.  :smile:

I would personally hesitate to put the word "any" in the reader's mind when we're about to restrict usage to Markdown and MDX files. This would be my suggestion:

> A **content entry** is a Markdown (`.md`) or MDX (`.mdx`) file stored inside of the content collection directory. 

I also don't feel like the advice on naming is particularly helpful? Are there *absolutely no* restrictions on file names? (And if so, I'd phrase it that way because that could be helpful info worth noting, and a little more in keeping with the docs tone.) It can start with a special character? An underscore? Contain emojis? I also don't think it's needed to suggest consistent naming, but if phrased in terms of letting them know that it's a "flat structure" or something like that, maybe?

Author: This was something we went back and forth on last week, but settled on the implemented behavior that filenames can be literally anything! I'd still rather be much more strict personally (only lower-case, dashes, etc) but this felt too late to change. 

Post-launch, I would love for us to pick this back up as a docs "recommendation", so that even if we keep supporting anything, we could add a recommendation here for a certain format.

- src/content/
  - **newsletter/** the "newsletter" collection
    - week-1.md a collection entry
    - week-2.md a collection entry
    - week-3.md a collection entry
</FileTree>

Once you have a collection, you can start [querying your content](#querying-collections) using Astro's built-in content APIs.

### The ".astro" Directory

Astro stores important metadata for content collections in an `.astro` directory in your project. No action is needed on your part to maintain or update this directory. You are encouraged to ignore it entirely while working in your project.

The `.astro` directory will be updated for you automatically anytime you run the [`astro dev`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-dev), [`astro build`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-build) commands. You can run [`astro sync`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-sync) at any time to update the `.astro` directory manually.

:::tip
If you're using Git for version control, we recommend ignoring the `.astro` directory by adding `.astro` to your `.gitignore`. This tells Git to ignore this directory and any files inside of it.

```bash
echo ".astro" >> .gitignore
```
:::

### Organizing with multiple collections 

> If two files represent two different kinds of content (e.g. a blog post and an author profile), they most likely belong in two different collections. This is an important concept to remember because important features like frontmatter validation and automatic TypeScript typings require that all entries share a similar frontmatter structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two files represent different kinds of content (e.g. a blog post and an author profile), they most likely belong in different collections. Helpful features like frontmatter validation and automatic TypeScript typings require that all entries in the same collection share a similar frontmatter structure.
```
I came for the double "important" and I stayed to avoid narrating the remembering process.

I chose "helpful" features, but could also see "powerful" features. I think those are more helpful to the reader than "important" (since these are not actually required).

If you find yourself working with different types of content, you should create multiple collection to represent each type. You can create as many different collections in your project as you'd like.

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - **newsletter/** 
    - week-1.md
    - week-2.md
    - week-3.md
  - **authors/** split different content types into new collections
    - grace-hopper.md
    - alan-turing.md
    - batman.md
</FileTree>

### Organizing with subdirectories

A content collection is always a top-level folder inside of the `src/content/` directory. You cannot nest one collection inside of another. However, you can use subdirectories to organize your content within a collection.

> For example, you can use the following directory structure to organize i18n translations within a single `docs` collection. When you go to query this collection, you'll be able to filter the result by language using the file path. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can use the following directory structure to organize i18n translations within a single `docs` collection. When you query this collection, you'll be able to filter the result by language using the file path. 
```
Helps to keep the sentence moving, and also helps to not have extraneous verbs for the translators so they can more easily focus on the needed action verbs.

<FileTree>
- src/content/
  - docs/ this collection uses subdirectories to organize by language
    - **en/**
    - **es/**
    - **de/**
</FileTree>

## Defining Collections

> :::caution

Reviewer: We know from exprience, it's a scary look in docs to have a caution right under a heading! Especially a "normal" heading like "Defining Collections." -> "Oh, let's see how to define my collection.... FLAMING CAUTION"

This caution should be moved to the bottom of the section, and I'd argue a caution is perhaps overkill for this and the text can stand on its own. The sentiment is fine, but at best this seems like a "note" or a "tip", which is at least a little more playful.

Author: no worries, I'll switch to note!

The `src/content/config.ts` file is optional. However, choosing not to define your collections will disable some of their best features like frontmatter schema validation or automatic TypeScript typings. 
:::

To get the most out of your content collections, create a `src/content/config.ts` file in your project (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). This is a special file that Astro will automatically load and use to configure your content collections.

```ts
// src/content/config.ts
// 1. Import utilities from `astro:content`
import { defineCollection } from 'astro:content';
// 2. Define your collection(s)
const blogCollection = defineCollection({ /* ... */ });
// 3. Export a single `collections` object to register your collection(s)
//    This key should match your collection directory name in "src/content"
export const collections = {
  'blog': blogCollection,
};
```

### Setting up TypeScript

> To get the most out of content collections in Astro, you may need to update your `tsconfig.json` to enable `strictNullChecks`. This change is only required if you **do not** already extend Astro's `strict` or `strictest` recommended TypeScript settings in your `tsconfig.json` file.
> 
> ```json title="tsconfig.json" ins={5}
> {
>   // Note: No change needed if you use "astro/tsconfigs/strict" or "astro/tsconfigs/strictest"
>   "extends": "astro/tsconfigs/base",
>   "compilerOptions": {
>     "strictNullChecks": true
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
To get the most out of content collections in Astro, you may need to update your `tsconfig.json` to enable `strictNullChecks`. This change is only required if currently extend Astro's `base` TypeScript settings in your `tsconfig.json` file.

```json title="tsconfig.json" ins={5} "base"
{
  // Note: No change needed if you use "strict" or "strictest"
  "extends": "astro/tsconfigs/base",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strictNullChecks": true
  }
}
```
``````
I think we can tighten this up by avoiding the negative framing.

Author: This is no longer true though. There are situations where you can be extending something other than base (or not extending anything, and defining everything yourself) that you still need to make this change.

### Defining a collection schema

Schemas enforce consistent frontmatter within a collection. A schema **guarantees** that your frontmatter exists in a predictable form when you need to reference or query it. If any file violates its collection schema, Astro will provide a helpful error to let you know.

> Schemas also power Astro's automatic TypeScript typings for your content. When you define a schema for your collection, Astro will automatically generate and apply a TypeScript interface to it. The result is full TypeScript support when you query your collection, including proprety auto-completion and type-checking. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schemas also power Astro's automatic TypeScript typings for your content. When you define a schema for your collection, Astro will automatically generate and apply a TypeScript interface to it. The result is full TypeScript support when you query your collection, including proprety autocompletion and type-checking. 
```
No hyphen

To create your first content schema, create a `src/content/config.ts` file if one does not already exist (`.js` and `.mjs` extensions are also supported). This file should:

1. Import the proper utilities from `astro:content`. 
2. Define each collection that you'd like to validate with a schema.
3. Export a single `collections` object to register your collections.

```ts
// src/content/config.ts
// 1. Import utilities from `astro:content`
import { z, defineCollection } from 'astro:content';
// 2. Define a schema for each collection you'd like to validate.
const blogCollection = defineCollection({
  schema: z.object({
    title: z.string(),
    tags: z.array(z.string()),
    image: z.string().optional(),
  }),
});
// 3. Export a single `collections` object to register your collection(s)
export const collections = {
  'blog': blogCollection,
};
```

### Defining multiple collections

> You can define as many collections in your project as you would like. As long as they are exported from the `src/content/config.ts` file from inside the `collections` object, they will be loaded by Astro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `defineCollection()` as many times as you want to create multiple schemas.  All collections must be exported from inside the single `collections` object.
```
I think this might be clearer, more explicitly hitting home "defineCollections many times, export a collections object once."

      alt: z.string(),
    }),
    author: z.string().default('Anonymous'),
    language: z.enum(['en', 'es']),
    tags: z.array(z.string()),
    // An optional frontmatter property. Very common!
    footnote: z.string().optional(),
    // Convert a standard date-string into a `Date` object
    publishDate: z.string().transform(str => new Date(str)),
    // Advanced: Validate that the string is also an email
    authorContact: z.string().email(),
    // Advanced: Validate that the string is also a URL
    canonicalURL: z.string().url(),
  })
})
```

### Defining custom slugs

Astro will generate a unique `slug` value for each content entry. By default, a content entry's `slug` is based on its `id` (its filename).

To customize this value, provide a `slug()` function in `defineCollection()`. Your `slug()` function can override the default slug with a custom value of your choosing.

```ts {4-6}
// Example: Override the default entry slug with the 
// "permalink" frontmatter property, if it exists.
const blog = defineCollection({
  slug: ({ id, defaultSlug, data, body }) => {
    return data.permalink || defaultSlug;
  },
});
```

### Updating TypeScript configuration

> To benefit from the full TypeScript and autocompletion features of [using schemas with your collections](#defining-a-collection-schema), you may need to update your `tsconfig.json` to enable `strictNullChecks`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To benefit from the full TypeScript and autocompletion features of [using schemas with your collections](#creating-a-collection-schema), you may need to update your `tsconfig.json` to enable `strictNullChecks`.
```

### `getCollection()`

`getCollection()` returns an array of all entries in a collection. It requires the name of a `collection` as an argument.

```js
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const allBlogPosts = await getCollection('blog');
```

`getCollection` also takes a "filter" callback as an optional second argument. This allows you to filter your query based on an entry's `id`, `slug`, or `data` (frontmatter) properties.

```js
// Example: Only return entries with `draft: true` frontmatter
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const draftBlogPosts = await getCollection('blog', ({ data }) => {
  return data.draft === true;
});
```

#### Filtering nested directories

The filter argument lets you query for nested directories within a collection. Since the `id` includes the full nested path, you can filter by the start of each `id` to only return items from a specific nested directory:

```js
// Example: Only return entries from `src/content/docs/en/`
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const enDocs = await getCollection('docs', ({ id }) => {
  return id.startsWith('en/');
});
```

> ### `getEntryBySlug()`

Author: yes! I removed but didn't add back to reference, will do that in this PR.

> ### `getEntryBySlug()`

Author: actually, it already exists in `api-reference`! Updating this section to point to that, and then focus on more guide-like, use-case driven discussion.

`getEntryBySlug()` is function that returns a specific entry in a collection. It takes two arguments: the collection name and the content entry's `slug` (URL-ready).

```js
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
const entry = await getEntryBySlug('blog', 'enterprise');
```

### Using content in templates

> Once you have queried your content, you can use the returned entries inside of your Astro pages and components. For example, you can include frontmatter in a component template, or pass an entire content entry object as a prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have queried your content, you can use the returned entries inside of your Astro pages and components. For example, you can include frontmatter in a component template from a `data` object, or pass an entire content entry object as a prop.

See the [entire list of properties returned](/en/reference/api-reference/#getcollection) from queries.
```

Since we've lost the list of returned data properties on this page, I'd argue for being just a tiny bit more explicit somehow about what is returned and available for rendering here if we want to offload the bulk of the info to another page. I think it is appropriate here to at least say that you get a `data` object of your frontmatter properties, and `slug`, for example. 

And, somewhere (I'm just making all these notes here, but I really mean incorporated around this section), I would explicitly link back to the properties on `api-reference` (assuming that's where they'll go).

Author: done!

> In the following example, we bring together everything we've learned to display a filtered list of links to your blog:

Author: thank you! I love to see some hard voice/grammar rules that I can lean on now as a contributor!

> In the following example, we bring together everything we've learned to display a filtered list of links to your blog:

Author: resolved!

```json title="tsconfig.json" ins={3}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strictNullChecks": true
  }
}
```

Note that if you are currently extending Astro's `strict` or `strictest` recommended settings, no changes is needed.

```json title="tsconfig.json" "strict" "strictest"
{
  // No change needed!
  "extends": "astro/tsconfigs/strict"
}
```

### The ".astro" Directory

Astro generates type information and metadata from your content collections in a new `.astro` directory. No action is needed on your part to maintain or update this directory. It is safe to ignore it in your project.

:::tip
If you're using Git for version control, we recommend ignoring this generated directory by adding `.astro` to your `.gitignore`.
:::

The `.astro` directory will be updated for you automatically anytime you run the [`astro dev`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-dev), [`astro build`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-build) commands. You can run [`astro sync`](/en/reference/cli-reference/#astro-sync) yourself to update `.astro` manually.

> ## The "src/content" Directory

Author: Yup agreed, reworked it!

Astro treats the `src/content/` directory as special. This is where **collections** (folders) of Markdown/MDX **entries** (files) can be stored, with a single configuration file to define each collection's **schema** (frontmatter data types and shape). Files other than your `.md`/`.mdx` content are not permitted inside `src/content/`.

> ## Querying Collections

Reviewer: From this section, to Generating Routes, I'm not sure the heading levels/right sidebar organization is quite right.

Content-wise, Rendering Content doesn't seem like it should be a `##` as it seems more a peer with "Using Content in Astro Templates". But, I'm not sure I'd throw *everything* under the title of "Querying Collections"? And, they alternate between "script stuff" and "templating stuff".

These related items seem to be:

Script - Making the queries/filtering
Template- Templating the metadata (but not using `render()`)
Script - Passing an entire Content as props
Template - Rendering the content itself with `render()`
Script/Template of modified metadata

I think these could all be `###` peers under one `##`? (Which we'd need a name for.)

Author: I'm not sure I entirely follow this, but I agree this feels a little incorrectly placed. Just reorganized it to be a party of "querying", lmk what you think.

const oneBlogPost = await getEntryBySlug('blog', 'enterprise');
```

#### Filtering collection queries

`getCollection` takes an optional "filter" callback that allows you to filter your query based on an entry's `id`, `slug`, or `data` (frontmatter) properties.

You can use this to filter by any content criteria you like. For example, you can filter by frontmatter properties like `draft` to prevent any draft blog posts from publishing to your blog:

```js
// Example: Filter content entries with `draft: true` frontmatter
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const draftBlogEntries = await getCollection('blog', ({ data }) => {
  return data.draft !== true;
});
```

The filter argument also supports filtering by nested directories within a collection. Since the `id` includes the full nested path, you can filter by the start of each `id` to only return items from a specific nested directory:

```js
// Example: Filter entries by sub-directory in the collection
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const englishDocsEntries = await getCollection('docs', ({ id }) => {
  return id.startsWith('en/');
});
```

### Using content in Astro templates

> Once you have queried your collection entries, you can use those entries to render information about your content. You can access each entry directly inside of your Astro component template. This lets you to render HTML for things like links to your content (using the content `slug`) or information about your content (using the `data` property).

Author: this kind of edit is the best

```astro "{ remarkPluginFrontmatter }"
---
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
const blogPost = await getEntryBySlug('blog', 'post-1');
const { remarkPluginFrontmatter } = await blogPost.render();
---
<!-- 
  This example assumes `readingTime` was injected by a remark plugin.
  See our "reading time" example for more details:
  https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#example-calculate-reading-time
-->
<p>{blogPost.data.title} — {remarkPluginFrontmatter.readingTime}</p>
```

<details>
<summary>**🙋 Why don't `getCollection()` and `getEntryBySlug()` contain these values?**</summary>

The remark and rehype pipelines are only run when your content is **rendered.** This lets `render()` access anything generated by these plugins like injected frontmatter. To stay performant, `getCollection()` and `getEntryBySlug()` do not have this capability.

</details>

## Generating Routes from Content

> Because content collections live outside of the `src/pages` directory, its up to you to create your [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that will render your content and any collection entries to HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because content collections live outside of the `src/pages/` directory, its up to you to create [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that will render your content and any collection entries to HTML.
```

The way that you generate routes in Astro depends on your build [`output`](/en/reference/configuration-reference/#output) mode: 'static' (the default) or 'server' (for SSR).

### Building for static output (default)

> If you are building a static website (Astro's default behavior), you are expected use Astro's [`getStaticPaths()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getstaticpaths) to create multiple routes from the same `src/pages` component at build-time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are building a static website (Astro's default behavior), you will need to create multiple routes from a single page component at build-time using Astro's [`getStaticPaths()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getstaticpaths).
```

> Inside of `getStaticPaths()`, you would call [`getCollection()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getcollection) to query your content entries and then create all of the static paths you need using the `slug` parameter for each page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside of `getStaticPaths()`, call [`getCollection()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getcollection) to query your content entries and then create all of the static paths you need using the `slug` parameter for each page. 
```

#### Filtering collection queries

`getCollection()` takes an optional "filter" callback that allows you to filter your query based on an entry's `id`, `slug`, or `data` (frontmatter) properties.

You can use this to filter by any content criteria you like. For example, you can filter by frontmatter properties like `draft` to prevent any draft blog posts from publishing to your blog:

```js
// Example: Filter content entries with `draft: true` frontmatter
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const draftBlogEntries = await getCollection('blog', ({ data }) => {
  return data.draft !== true;
});
```

The filter argument also supports filtering by nested directories within a collection. Since the `id` includes the full nested path, you can filter by the start of each `id` to only return items from a specific nested directory:

```js
// Example: Filter entries by sub-directory in the collection
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';
const englishDocsEntries = await getCollection('docs', ({ id }) => {
  return id.startsWith('en/');
});
```

### Using content in Astro templates

> Once you have queried your collection entries, access each entry directly inside of your Astro component template. This lets you to render HTML for things like links to your content (using the content `slug`) or information about your content (using the `data` property).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have queried your collection entries, you can access each entry directly inside of your Astro component template. This lets you to render HTML for things like links to your content (using the content `slug`) or information about your content (using the `data` property).
```
Not wrong! But feels like this fits the sentence, so I just wanted to make sure this was a deliberate omission. Ignore if intended!

If you do this, you can use the [`CollectionEntry`](/en/reference/api-reference/#collection-entry-type) utility to correctly type your components props using TypeScript.  This utility takes a string argument that matches the name of your collection schema, and will inherit all of the properties of that collection's schema.

```astro /CollectionEntry(?:<.+>)?/
---
// src/components/BlogCard.astro
import type { CollectionEntry } from 'astro:content';
interface Props {
  post: CollectionEntry<'blog'>;
}

// `post` will match your 'blog' collection schema type
const { post } = Astro.props;
---
```

### Rendering content to HTML

Once queried, you can render a collection entry to HTML using the entry `render()` function property. Calling this function gives you access to rendered content and metadata, including both a `<Content />` component and a list of all rendered headings.

```astro {5}
---
// src/pages/render-example.astro
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
const entry = await getEntryBySlug('blog', 'post-1');
const { Content, headings } = await entry.render();
---
<p>Written by: {entry.data.author}</p>
<Content />
```

## Generating Routes from Content

> Because content collections live outside of the `src/pages/` directory, its up to you to create [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that will render your content and any collection entries to HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because content collections live outside of the `src/pages/` directory, it's up to you to create [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that will render your content and any collection entries to HTML.
```
nit: apostrohe

const { Content } = await entry.render();
---
<h1>{entry.data.title}</h1>
<Content />
```

This will generate a new page for every entry in the `blog` collection. For example, an entry at `src/content/blog/hello-world.md` will have a slug of `hello-world`, and therefore its final URL will be `/posts/hello-world/`.

### Building for server output (SSR)

If you are building a dynamic website (using Astro's SSR support), you are not expected to generate any paths ahead-of-time during the build. Instead, your page should examine the request (using `Astro.request` or `Astro.params`) to find the `slug` on-demand, and then fetch it using [`getEntryBySlug()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getentrybyslug). 

```astro "{ slug: Astro.params }"
---
// src/pages/posts/[slug].astro
// NOTE: This example will only work in 
import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';
// 1. Get the slug from the request, on-demand
const { slug } = Astro.params;
// 2. Query the entry directly using its slug
const entry = await getEntryBySlug('blog', slug);
// 3. (Optional) render the entry to HTML in the template
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---
<h1>{entry.data.title}</h1>
<Content />
```

> ## Modifying Frontmatter with Remark

Reviewer: This is an appropriate use of the caution! Something we don't actually want anyone to do!  :smile:

If you are building a static website (Astro's default), use `getCollection()` inside a [`getStaticPaths()`](/en/reference/api-reference/#getstaticpaths) function to query your content entries and provide the `slug` parameter for each page. 

```astro "{ slug: entry.slug }"
---
// src/pages/posts/[...slug].astro
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const blog = await getCollection('blog');
  return blog.map(entry => ({
    params: { slug: entry.slug }, props: { entry },
  }));
}

const { entry } = Astro.props;
const { Content } = await entry.render();
---
<h1>{entry.data.title}</h1>
<Content />
```

This will generate page routes for every entry in the `blog` collection, mapping each entry’s slug to a URL. For example, an entry at `src/content/blog/hello-world.md` will have a slug of `hello-world` and the collection entry `src/content/blog/en/intro.md` will have a slug of `en/intro`.

Because this dynamic route is in `src/pages/posts/`, the final URLs will be `/posts/hello-world/` and `/posts/en/intro/`.

> #### Generating pages in SSR mode

Author: @bholmesdev I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but I think I found an issue with Content Collections when we switch to SSR. How does fetching an entry work in an SSR site, where you call `getEntry()` based on the `Astro.request.pathname` value?

`slug` is the wrinkle: if the pathname is my `slug`, but `getEntry()` is by `id`, you have no way to call `getEntry()`. `getEntry('blog', slugFromPathname)` wouldn't match the correct entry, as I understand it.

Lets chat on Tuesday, I have thoughts!

Reviewer 2: No worries, very aware of this! We recommend using `getCollection()` with a filter today:

```ts
---
// taken from SSR tests in core
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';

const { slug } = Astro.params;
const matches = await getCollection('blog', post => post.slug === slug);
const post = matches[0];
if (!post) {
	throw new Error(`Not found: ${slug}`);
}
const { Content } = await post.render();
---
```

I agree `getEntry()` could be changed to address this. Discussing with a user in our `#general` chat, turning `getEntry()` into a "find first match" function would be helpful here:

```diff
---
import { getEntry } from 'astro:content';

const { slug } = Astro.params;
- const matches = await getCollection('blog', post => post.slug === slug);
- const post = matches[0];
+ const post = await getEntry('blog', post => post.slug === slug);
...
```

So you can pass the ID string directly if known for an O(1) lookup time, or pass a function to lookup by other properties. This also unlocks lookup by `data` properties without a `matches` array.

We can also discuss ensuring all `slug`s are unique to allow direct lookup by slug:
```ts
const post = await getEntry('blog', { slug: Astro.params.slug });
```
...though this has more breaking implications, and wouldn't be as flexible. Since we bundle a map of the entire collection into your SSR build, regardless of whether you use `getEntry()` or `getCollection()`, I lean towards the first option. Happy to discuss further next week!

Author: Yes, let's definitely discuss early next week. But, I'll throw this idea out now so that its not a surprise on Tuesday, and hopefully having the weekend to sit with it helps:

- `slug` doubling as both nice-to-have meta-property _and_ an essential ID lookup is beginning to smell (for lack of a better term), especially since `id` is already meant to be that essential ID lookup property.
- `slug` may be redundant, given that we already have `id`
- `slug` can be removed, in favor of `id`

This was less of an issue up to this point when you consider `slug` as a nice-to-have built-in helper to help users create their URLs easier. Nothing wrong with that! But, given that "get by request path" will actually be an essential use-case for any `[slug].astro` page (SSG too, not just SSR), the confusion and redundancy between `id` and `slug` becomes more of a critical issue to resolve.

I see what you mean where this can be solved in userland by just using `getCollection()` and filtering. But I'd argue that getting the entire collection just to filter & grab a single entry is not a very friend API, and not what users would expect from such a basic use-case (we have feedback from users today to back this up, who are upset with having to do this with `import.meta.glob` and `Astro.glob`).

I also see what you mean where this could be added as an _additional_ feature to `getEntry()`, but that's where I'll ask us to take a step back and reconsider _why_ we need two different lookup methods, when really one should suffice?

### Alternative: Remove `slug` in favor of `id`

https://github.com/withastro/astro/compare/content-slug-to-id?expand=1

I spun up a quick prototype, merging `slug` and `id` together to create a more slug-like, unique `id`. Fun fact: this is actually something that I pushed for originally, back when `id` was the full file path. I think this presents an opportunity to solve a problem by revisiting this idea.

### Example

```diff
- <a href={'/blog/' + post.slug}>{post.data.title}</a>
+ <a href={'/blog/' + post.id}>{post.data.title}</a>
```

```diff
// src/pages/blog/index.astro
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const posts = await getCollection('blog');
  return posts.map((post) => ({
-   params: { slug: post.slug },
+   params: { slug: post.id },
  }));
}
```

User code would be updated to use the entry ID instead of its slug. `id` becomes more slug-like to accommodate this. The main change to `id` is that it no longer has the file extension included. It also no longer uses github-slugger internally. Instead, it's expected that the user should use slug-friendly filenames in content collections.

```
src/content/blog/first-post.md         id: "first-post"
src/content/blog/foo/second-post.md    id: "foo/second-post"
src/content/blog/third post.md         warning/error
```

### Still to decide: can we support custom slugs/permalinks?

With slug gone, so is the current `slug()` customizer hook in `defineCollection`. I do love this idea of id/slug/permalink customization, and I'd still love to bring it back.

However, I'll reiterate here that this feature was never granted as an essential/required goal of the design doc, and has always been considered okay to skip for an initial release to be added later as a fast-follow after. IIRC, it was mainly seen as okay to add to initial release scope because it was seen as easy. I wouldn't want us to sacrifice on the critical APIs in an attempt to save a non-critical API that can be added later. 

One potentially easy answer would be to just take all the work already done on `slug()`, and rename it to `id()`. Dynamically changing IDs feels a bit awkward, but since that's already what the current proposal is doing with slugs I don't its a step backwards from where we are today and an acceptable compromise. Given that this is an advanced use-case, we would probably be safe to deprecate this later if we came up with something better.

I'd also like to explore an alternative proposal to support a static `id:` frontmatter property in any entry file, that manually sets the `id` (defaulting to the file name, if no `id:` frontmatter is given). I think the fact that this is what users already do and expect to work with the `permalink` property gives us a good datapoint that this is a pattern that users would enjoy. It's less powerful than the dynamic `slug()`/`id()` callback idea, but I think I could argue that the requirement of a `id:` frontmatter to be static and visible at the top of any file is easier to reason about.

### To be revisited Tuesday!

I'll be offline for the rest of the weekend dealing with house repair stuff, so I won't be able to revisit this or say much more until Tuesday. Given all the options that we have available, I'm confident that we can come up with a solution here next week without sacrificing our 2.0 launch timeline.

Reviewer 2: I... disagree that custom `slug`s can be removed, since the RFC process and discussing with users both exposed custom `slug`s as important. I also don't see why reconciling `id` and `slug` _requires_ that custom `slug` mapping needs to be removed, since it fairly straightforward to ensure all generated slugs are unique at build time. I do agree that reconciling `id` and `slug` makes sense though. We can discuss then, yes!

Reviewer 3: I ran into the SSR issue myself. My first thought was that `getEntry()` should return `| undefined` and that it would be your responsibility as a user to to convert your URL slug to a valid id. If you pass it a known static id it could omit the possible undefined. Not saying this is the solution, but it was my instinct.

----

I think we should be careful not to leak page concepts into content. Content should just be content. You can generate pages with the content in any number of ways.

That's why I don't like the "slug-like id" idea, @FredKSchott. This means you can't have `post.md` and `post.mdx` in the same collection. To me that violates the idea that it's content and we've just created another pages folder.

Reviewer 3: Here's an idea that I think no one will like (probably even me!) but let me through it out anyways:

- Get rid of `getEntry()` entirely. How it's shown being used in the docs is probably not how anyone is actually going to use it. There might be times where you hard-code a known piece of content to get, but the confusion the API causes the minimal value created through the API.
- Get rid of the concept of `slug`. The user can add slug to their frontmatter themselves and use that as a key in this scenario, if they want.
  - This prevents the "duplicate id" problem.
  - This prevents leaking page concepts into content.
- Rename `id` to `filename` to more clearly identify what it is and to signal that the user is going to have to figure out a way to translate that to a slug (if they need to do so) or to use a frontmatter property of their own choosing.

Reviewer 3: I think essential problem here is that we don't have the concept of a "page". A collection is generic. Which is good but makes this use-case harder.

I'd like to make a comparison to Wordpress, which does have the concept of a page. When you create a page it:

- Creates a permalink from the title
- Allows you to override the (permalink)

![5082c15022ac6e42b6b523e2f8acf0b1db9ecd0a](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/361671/212937836-933747eb-e428-416d-8c9d-24a3b04c2f78.jpg)

So maybe this is the missing thing we need to add. Rather than making all collections of pages, make it so that you can signal which collections actually *are* used as pages.

One idea going off of this, in `defineCollection` add an optional `type` property whose value can be `'page'`. For collections of type pages you are *required* to provide a `slug`. You can then use a new querying API:

```astro
---
import { getPageBySlug } from 'astro:content';

const entry = getPageBySlug(Astro.params.slug);

if(!entry) return new Response(null, { status: 404 })
---
<!-- ... -->
```

Reviewer 4: Hmm. What user issue does this extra complexity solve?

I want to make sure I understand the issue. The issue is that `getEntry` looks up by `id` but for “page” content, you more likely want to look up by `slug` as that’s what will be in `Astro.params` in SSR.

Main option today:

```js
const { slug } = Astro.params;
const [entry] = await getCollection('blog', (post) => post.slug === slug);
if (!entry) return new Response(null, { status: 404 });
```

A userland (or official) `getEntryBySlug(collection, slug)` abstraction around that is already possible today so is this really as big an issue as we think?

Author: Resolved in Discord, no change needed to `id`/`slug` but `getEntry` will be updated to `getEntryBySlug` to account for this much more common usecase.
